Add EIP-1238: Non-transferable Token Standard (#5617)
ethereum/EIPs: EIPS/eip-1238.md

## Motivation
The idea is to have tokens that once assigned cannot be transferred (like reputation) and that can be used by websites, or contracts to make users perform some actions. For example, if a user accumulates paper submissions at conferences, then they can use their paper badges to request grants. It's important that they can never share these badges.

This is the equivalent of a variety of other use cases

- Accumulating badges: degrees from academic institutions, paper publications for conferences, badges that allow for access in a building or in a special chat.
- Experience points: points accumulated in a game, points accumulated by being honest in a decentralized system for some time or a DAO.
- Statements: more broadly, any statement that is issued or signed by a contract, a dao, a single user that requires to be on-chain.
- Subscription: badges can represent the validity of a paid subscription.

> Additionally, this standard could be used as a primitive for Soulbound tokens, whereby the recovery of a Soul would be done by obtaining signatures from co-owners of tokens with the same id.

Reviewer: Since there has been at least 4 attempts to propose a soul-bound / non-transferable NFT, I'd also suggest you add to your motivation and rationale on what this ERC has better merit than other competing ERCs e.g.  https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-5114
https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-5633

Author: Good point @xinbenlv! I'm familiar with the other EIPs, but they either build on previous standards like EIP-1155 as extensions which means unecessary transfer functions or propose different designs leading to a different set of features. I added more in motivation: https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/pull/5617/commits/a7f94be9088885831bf267fa4a48e263da684f39

- Statements: more broadly, any statement that is issued or signed by a contract, a dao, a single user that requires to be on-chain.
- Subscription: badges can represent the validity of a paid subscription.

Additionally, this standard could be used as a primitive for Soulbound tokens, whereby the recovery of a Soul would be done by obtaining signatures from co-owners of tokens with the same id.

Multiple proposals for non-transferable / Soulbound tokens have been put forth, however this one presents a unique combination of features which includes having multiple token types in one contract (similar to [EIP-1155](./eip-1155.md)), recipient's consent and, optionally, token staking and expiry.

## Specification
Every contract compliant with this EIP must implement the following interface:

```solidity
interface IERC1238 is IERC165 {
    /**
     * @dev Emitted when `amount` tokens of token type `id` are minted to `to` by `minter`.
     */
    event MintSingle(address indexed minter, address indexed to, uint256 indexed id, uint256 amount);

    /**
     * @dev Equivalent to multiple {MintSingle} events, where `minter` and `to` is the same for all token types.
     */

>     event MintBatch(address indexed minter, address indexed to, uint256[] ids, uint256[] amounts);

Reviewer 2: Why do you have both `MintSingle` and `MintBatch`? Couldn't `MintBatch` handle both cases?

If there's a reason, please add it to the EIP's rationale section.

Author: Good point, I like how it makes the interface simpler. I also applied the same reasoning to the events related to burning.

    /**
     * @dev Emitted when `amount` tokens of token type `id` owned by `owner` are burned by `burner`.
     */
    event BurnSingle(address indexed burner, address indexed owner, uint256 indexed id, uint256 amount);

    /**
     * @dev Equivalent to multiple {BurnSingle} events, where `owner` and `burner` is the same for all token types.
     */
    event BurnBatch(address indexed burner, address indexed owner, uint256[] ids, uint256[] amounts);

    /**
     * @dev Returns the amount of tokens of token type `id` owned by `account`.
     *
     * Requirements:
     *

>      * - `account` cannot be the zero address.

Reviewer 2: Why can't the zero address hold tokens? Is that a hard requirement for all implementations? Again, probably worth putting in the Rationale.

Author: Added more in the Rationale section.
I'm thinking about the consequences if a balance check is used for gating access and there's a bug and the zero address is passed instead of the user's address...

}
```

The **Holdable extension** is OPTIONAL for smart contracts that implement this EIP. This enables token owners to let their tokens be held by another address or to stake them in a smart contract.

```solidity
interface IERC1238Holdable is IERC1238 {
    /**
     * @dev Event emitted when `from` entrusts `to` with `amount` of tokens with token `id`.
     */
    event Entrust(address from, address to, uint256 indexed id, uint256 amount);

    /**
     * @dev Event emitted when tokens are burnt and the holder fails to acknowledge the burn.
     */
    event BurnAcknowledgmentFailed(address holder, address burner, address from, uint256 indexed id, uint256 amount);

    /**
     * @dev Returns the balance of a token holder for a given `id`.
     */
    function heldBalance(address holder, uint256 id) external view returns (uint256);

    /**
     * @dev Lets sender entrusts `to` with `amount`
     * of tokens which gets transferred between their respective balances
     * of tokens held.
     */
    function entrust(
        address to,
        uint256 id,
        uint256 amount
    ) external;
}

> ```

Reviewer 2: This holdable extension needs a lot more explanation. You should define the concepts, the expected flow, etc.

Author: I added more explanations in https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/pull/5617/commits/a17e69dd6a6a2301d53ba01fdcc93f694aaa95c7

---
eip: 1238
title: Non-transferable Tokens
description: An interface for fungible and non-fungible, non-transferable tokens.
author: Raphael Roullet (@ra-phael), Chris Chung (@0xpApaSmURf), Nicola Greco (@nicola)
discussions-to: https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/eip-1238-non-transferable-tokens/9044
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: ERC
created: 2022-09-07
requires: 165, 712
---

## Abstract

> A _badge_ or non-transferable token (_NTT_) is a token that cannot be transferred once assigned. Badges can be accumulated through time and put at stake. Simply speaking, badges are statements about a public key: they can be quantitative (e.g. reputation, experience) or qualitative (badges, titles).

Reviewer 2: > Badges can be accumulated through time and put at stake.

I am not sure what "put at stake" means here. Is this some kind of staking mechanism, or are you talking about the badge issuer's reputation, or something else entirely?

> The Non-Transferable Token standard defines a set of standard APIs allowing the identification of statements (called badges) attributed to a public key, such that different dapps and smart contract can use to filter users or to provide user with different badges different experiences. More importantly, this standard defines a way for which users can put their badges at stake. Badges cannot be transferred but can be lost (after staking) or can expire.

Reviewer 2: Couple grammar and stylistic changes:

```suggestion
The Non-Transferable Token standard defines a set of APIs that identify statements (called badges) attributed to a public key, such that different dapps and smart contracts can filter users or tailor experiences based on what badges a user has. More importantly, this standard defines a way for users to put their badges at stake. Badges cannot be transferred but can be lost (after staking) or can expire.
```

## Motivation

> The idea is to have tokens that once assigned cannot be transferred (like reputation) and that can be used by websites, or contracts to make users perform some actions. For example, if a user accumulates paper submissions at conferences, then they can use their paper badges to request grants. It's important that they can never share these badges.

Reviewer 2: I don't think a badge can _force_ a user to do something :P

```suggestion
The idea is to have tokens that once assigned cannot be transferred (like reputation) and that can be used by websites, or contracts to allow users to perform some actions. For example, if a user accumulates paper submissions at conferences, then they can use their paper badges to request grants. It's important that they can never share these badges.
```

> This is the equivalent of a variety of other use cases

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is the equivalent of a variety of other use cases:
```

Additionally, this standard could be used as a primitive for Soulbound tokens, whereby the recovery of a Soul would be done by obtaining signatures from co-owners of tokens with the same id.

Multiple proposals for non-transferable / Soulbound tokens have been put forth, however this one presents a unique combination of features which includes having multiple token types in one contract (similar to [EIP-1155](./eip-1155.md)), recipient's consent and, optionally, token staking and expiry.

## Specification

Every contract compliant with this EIP must implement the following interface:

```solidity
interface IERC1238 is IERC165 {
    /**
     * @dev Emitted when some `amounts` of tokens with their respective `ids` are minted to `to` by `minter`.
     */
    event Minted(address indexed minter, address indexed to, uint256[] ids, uint256[] amounts);

    /**
     * @dev Emitted when some `amounts` of tokens with their respective `ids` are burned by `burner`.
     */
    event Burned(address indexed burner, address indexed owner, uint256[] ids, uint256[] amounts);

    /**
     * @dev Returns the amount of tokens of token type `id` owned by `account`.
     *
     * Requirements:
     *

>      * - `account` cannot be the zero address.

Reviewer 2: Coming back to this, I think you should be more specific about what behaviour you expect. Perhaps:

```suggestion
     * - `balanceOf(address(0x0))` MUST revert.
```

     */
    function balanceOf(address account, uint256 id) external view returns (uint256);

    /**
     * @dev Returns the balance of `account` for a batch of token `ids`.

>      *

Reviewer 2: You might want to repeat the non-zero requirement here.

     */
    function isExpired(uint256 id) external view returns (bool);

    /**
     * @dev Sets the expiry date for the tokens with id `id`.
     */
    function setExpiryDate(uint256 id, uint256 date) external;

    /**
     * @dev [Batched] version of {setExpiryDate}.
     */
    function setBatchExpiryDates(uint256[] memory ids, uint256[] memory dates) external;
}
```

The **Holdable extension** is OPTIONAL for smart contracts that implement this EIP. This extension enables token owners to let their tokens be held by another address, including "staking" them in a smart contract.
Since NTTs are non-transferable, the usual way of staking tokens by transferring ownership over them is not possible. In order to make staking possible, this extension introduces the notion of token holders, in addition to token owners:

- When minting tokens to Alice's address A, address A is the token owner but also the initial token holder. Alice can then call the `entrust` function to entrust address B with her tokens. Address B becomes the token holder while Alice remains the token owner.
- Only one address can hold specific tokens at a time.

> - A token holder can transfer tokens to another holder. Still, the important point is that this does not change ownership of the tokens.

Reviewer 2: Should this be:

```suggestion
- A token holder can entrust tokens to another holder. Still, the important point is that this does not change ownership of the tokens.
```

?

- Because token holders can “transfer” tokens they hold (via the `entrust` function) to any address they choose, they can also send them to the zero address and have it hold these tokens forever. So token owners are effectively putting their tokens at stake with this mechanism.

```solidity
interface IERC1238Holdable is IERC1238 {
    /**
     * @dev Event emitted when `from` entrusts `to` with `amount` of tokens with token `id`.
     */
    event Entrust(address from, address to, uint256 indexed id, uint256 amount);

    /**
     * @dev Event emitted when tokens are burnt and the holder fails to acknowledge the burn.
     */
    event BurnAcknowledgmentFailed(address holder, address burner, address from, uint256 indexed id, uint256 amount);

    /**
     * @dev Returns the balance of a token holder for a given `id`.
     */
    function heldBalance(address holder, uint256 id) external view returns (uint256);

    /**
     * @dev Lets sender entrusts `to` with `amount`
     * of tokens, which gets transferred between their respective balances
     * of tokens held.
     */
    function entrust(
        address to,
        uint256 id,
        uint256 amount
    ) external;
}
```

> Smart contracts holding tokens MUST implement the following interface:

Reviewer 2: This standard really can't place requirements on smart contracts that don't claim to implement it. I'd reword this to something like:

> Smart contracts that are intended to hold NTTs SHOULD implement the following interface to receive burn notifications:

```solidity
/**
 * @dev Interface proposal for contracts that need to hold ERC1238 tokens.
 */
interface IERC1238Holder is IERC1238Receiver {
    /**
     * @dev This function is called when tokens with id `id` are burnt.
     * Returns `true` as a sign that the burn was acknowledged and processed.
     */

>     function onBurn(uint256 id, uint256 amount) external returns (bool);

Reviewer 2: Is there an argument for making this `payable`?

}
```

> When burning tokens, implementers MUST try to call the `onBurn` function if the holder is a smart contract. This allows smart contract token holders to get notified when tokens that they hold are being burnt and gives them a chance to react and handle the situation as they see fit.

Reviewer 2: I would suggest expanding on what "try to call" means in this context. If `onBurn` reverts, is the token contract permitted to continue burning? If `onBurn` returns `false`?
